





Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)                       C. Holmberg
Request for Comments: 6809                                   I. Sedlacek
Category: Standards Track                                       Ericsson
ISSN: 2070-1721                                                H. Kaplan
                                                             Acme Packet
                                                           November 2012


     Mechanism to Indicate Support of Features and Capabilities in
                 the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)

Abstract

   This specification defines a new SIP header field, Feature-Caps.  The
   Feature-Caps header field conveys feature-capability indicators that
   are used to indicate support of features and capabilities for SIP
   entities that are not represented by the Uniform Resource Identifier
   (URI) of the Contact header field.

   SIP entities that are represented by the URI of the SIP Contact
   header field can convey media feature tags in the Contact header
   field to indicate support of features and capabilities.

1.  Introduction

   This specification defines a new SIP header field, Feature-Caps.  The
   Feature-Caps header field conveys feature-capability indicators that
   are used to indicate support of features and capabilities for SIP
   entities that are not represented by the Uniform Resource Identifier
   (URI) of the Contact header field.  Such cases are:

   o  The SIP entity acts as a SIP proxy.

   o  The SIP entity acts as a SIP registrar.

   o  The SIP entity acts as a Back-to-Back User Agent (B2BUA)
      [RFC3261], where the Contact header field URI represents another
      SIP entity.

   SIP entities that are represented by the URI of the SIP Contact
   header field can convey media feature tags in the Contact header
   field to indicate support of features and capabilities.



Holmberg, et al.             Standards Track                    [Page 3]

RFC 6809                      Proxy Feature                November 2012


   Unlike media feature tags, feature-capability indicators are intended
   to only be used with SIP.

4.  Feature-Caps Header Field

4.1.  Introduction

   The Feature-Caps header field is used by SIP entities to convey
   support of features and capabilities, by setting feature-capability
   indicators.  A feature-capability indicator conveyed in a
   Feature-Caps header field indicates that a SIP entity in the SIP
   message signaling path supports the associated feature and
   capability.
